good afternoon and welcome to the
coronavirus press conference from
Downing Street I'm joined this afternoon
by Professor Yvonne Doyle the medical
director of public health England and
dr. Nikki Kanani the deputy medical
director for NHS England who has a
particular focus on primary care today's
data shows that 1 million four hundred
and forty eight thousand and ten tests
for coronavirus have now been carried
out across Great Britain including 69
thousand four hundred and sixty three
tests carried out yesterday two hundred
and 1101 people have tested positive
that's an increase of 6111 cases since
yesterday thirteen thousand six hundred
and fifteen people are currently in
hospital with coronavirus in Great
Britain down from thirteen thousand nine
hundred and twenty two yesterday and
sadly of those hospitalised with the
virus thirty thousand and seventy-six
have now died that's an increase of 649
fatalities since yesterday behind those
numbers are heartbreaking losses for the
loved ones of all those who've died and
once again our thoughts and our prayers
are with their friends and their
families professor Doyle will provide an
update on the latest data on coronavirus
but first as community secretary I'd
like to take this opportunity to give an
update on the work being done locally
during the pandemic to keep people safe
to provide support for people's jobs and
their businesses and to prepare for the
reopening and the recovery of our local
economies
that's why it's appropriate that this
afternoon we're joined by regional
journalists who are doing so much to
keep people informed about how the
national effort is being coordinated in
our own communities a free country needs
a free press and the National the
regional and the local newspapers of our
country are under significant financial
pressure I'd like to echo the words of
the culture secretary recently in
encouraging everyone who can to buy a
newspaper as I said before the battle
against coronavirus will be won in every
city in every town and every village
across the country this is truly a
national effort and it's a national
effort taking place at a local level my
department the Ministry of Housing
Communities and Local Government has
played a vital role in bringing people
together to tackle the virus we've
provided local authorities with over 3.2
billion pounds during this pandemic so
that they can continue to support the
communities that need it through this
most challenging time and respond to the
immediate pressures they are facing due
to coronavirus whilst also protecting
and preserving vital public services at
the start of march I established a task
force to support local resilience forums
known as LRS standing them up at a local
level across the country to prepare each
and every community for a range of
different scenarios there are 38 lrf in
England which are made up of emergency
services a range of government agencies
health bodies and local authorities
they're headed by some of the most
senior and experienced local leaders of
the emergency services of councils the
NHS and others who together are leading
their communities through the crisis
with the full support of central
government recognising the unprecedented
challenge that we faced I
took the decision to embed within them
some of the finest military planners in
the world from our armed forces and I'm
very grateful for their hard work in
recent weeks
this combined expertise and leadership
is ensuring a comprehensive coordinated
and consistent response across the
country
responding to the urgent need for
personal protective equipment to reach
the frontline of the care sector we've
mobilized lrf s-- to help distribute PPE
and thus far they've delivered over 67
million items in England alone since
early April together with local councils
they're also assisting us in supporting
some of the most vulnerable individuals
in their communities and to date they've
helped us to ensure that 1 million boxes
of food and essential supplies have now
been delivered to those people
identified by the NHS as extremely
clinically vulnerable to coronavirus the
shielded with more than two hundred and
ninety thousand boxes being distributed
every week this has been a huge team
effort and I'd like to take this
opportunity to thank everyone involved
for the role that they've played and
will play in the weeks ahead we're also
working very closely with mares to make
sure that we have a coordinated approach
to tackling coronavirus at a local level
the government has been determined to
ensure that the vital work of keeping
people safe in their homes also
continues so with the support of the
mayors of London of the Liverpool city
region of Greater Manchester of
Sheffield of the West Midlands and
others we were able to announce the
building safety pledge these mares have
come together because they have a number
of the high-rise buildings with highly
flammable cladding in their respective
regions and the pledge that we agreed
sends a very clear message that vital
building safety work must continue
despite the corona virus pandemic and
we've been joined by 25 local
authorities including 18 in London who
also given their fulsome support as work
on many of these critical sites was
paused early on it's now slowly starting
to reassume as a result of this
initiative and I would urge any building
owner or contractor to do so as soon as
practical where it's safe to begin work
once again now coronavirus will not stop
our mission to level up to unite and to
unleash the potential of this country
the Prime Minister will set out on
Sunday our approach to the second phase
of this pandemic and as we look ahead to
supporting businesses as they are able
to reopen my department will lead our
work on how our local economies can
adapt evolve recover and grow I will
continue to support mayors and local
government leaders who will play a
critical role in this work every local
economy now needs a plan to restart and
recover we will be informing these plans
with our own detailed work in areas such
as how work places from factories to
construction sites to offices can be
adapted how outdoor spaces leisure and
businesses from parks to high streets to
markets can be managed and how public
transport networks from the tube to
trams to buses can operate in each case
guided by scientific and medical advice
we want to ensure appropriate and safe
social distancing providing the public
with the confidence to return to work
and to return to public spaces and
public transport knowing that it's
always safe to do so we're considering
how we can create more room in town
centres for pedestrians how it can make
it easier to cycle or walk to work and
we'll work with tower
and places whose economies have been
hardest hit intensively as the recovery
begins and our commitment to
infrastructure investment remains
undimmed for example over two-thirds of
hs2 sites are open we want
infrastructure and construction work to
begin again wherever it's safe to do so
it's clear to everyone that the pandemic
is putting huge pressure on economies
the world over and there's no denying
the challenges that lie ahead in our own
country but we cannot or will not let
this pandemic halt our work to improve
connectivity to provide vital social and
cultural infrastructure and to boost
economic growth across the regions that
is how we'll begin to rebuild and to
recover from this national emergency
we're working to ensure the right
support is available to local businesses
and last week high street businesses
began to receive the 22 billion pound
package designed to mitigate some of the
effects of coronavirus with grants of up
to 25,000 pounds being paid into bank
accounts of those businesses and of
course our 100 towns
benefiting from the 3.6 billion pound
towns fund will continue to receive our
support and will be working at pace with
them in the months ahead
local authorities have now paid out over
eight point six billion pounds in grants
to around 700 thousand businesses as
local government secretary I'd like to
congratulate those councils who have
worked extremely hard sometimes around
the clock to get those grants out to the
businesses that desperately need them
I'd like to congratulate to chitt sister
Ealing and hind burn councils who are
the three highest performing councils so
far in England businesses are also
receiving discounts of almost 10 billion
pounds on their rates bills in response
to covert 19 with the hardest hit by the
pandemic such as shops
cafes and pubs paying no business rates
whatsoever this financial year together
with existing reliefs this means that
1.1 million ratepayers are no longer
paying business rates this year this
week the Chancellor and I announced an
additional 5% uplift up to 617 million
pounds available to local councils to
fund small businesses that rent space in
shared offices industrial units and
Innovation Centers as well as our market
traders B&BS that pay council tax rather
than business rates and also to support
small charities and local councils will
now have more flexibility to make
pragmatic decisions to keep those
businesses going so they can bounce back
once they're able to do so moving
forward our mission is to ensure
everything we can is done to help people
to get back to work safely to reunite
friends and family and to reintroduce
the things that make life worth living
in a safe way as soon as it's safe to do
so
finally on Friday we will be celebrating
as a country the 75th anniversary of VE
Day my department like others had been
helping to plan some of the public
celebrations but we know that sadly will
now need to mark this important occasion
from Home Instead cabinet colleagues
have been speaking with veterans
organised by the Royal British Legion I
had the pleasure
early this week of speaking to Lesley a
98 year-old world war two veteran on the
phone Lesley was full of warmth and
wisdom telling me how he spent VE Day in
Siena having fought his way through
North Africa and Italy and how he would
be spending Friday more sedately
celebrating at home he said to me that
as we rebuilt and we recovered then he's
certain that we'll do so again this year
I'll now hand over to dr. Kanani in the
first instance and then to professor
Doyle
thank you
Thank You Secretary of State and I
wanted to just reflect on your point
about community and thank communities
for following government advice at a
incredibly difficult time I'm a GP and
before I was a GP I grew up in a
community pharmacy and my colleagues
have been facing probably the most
challenging time they've ever had si and
right across the NHS people are working
under significant stress and strain and
our communities have helped to look
after them and look out for them through
staying at home and following government
advice and becoming volunteer responders
and looking out for their own
communities so I want to thank you for
that it's really challenging isn't it I
have a family member who's shielding I'm
homeschooling children and it feels
difficult and we all want reassurance
and we miss the familiarity of the the
things that we always used to do but I
wanted to reassure people who are
listening and watching today that your
primary care services are still there
for you and I want to pay tribute to our
GP practices and our general practice
teams our dentists our optometrists the
unsung heroes the community pharmacists
on the high street who've continued to
work day after day and make sure that
they're there for you and this bank
holiday they'll be open as well and it
might feel a little bit different you
might have more telephone calls or
online consultations you might see
somebody dressed in PPE as I was
yesterday in my surgery but you must
know that your NHS is still here for you
so please come and contact us if you
need advice or support over the coming
weeks and months thank you
Thank You Nicky I think we all want to
reiterate your comments and the thanks
to GPS and everybody working in primary
care across the country that's on over
to Avon who's going to present today's
slides Thank You Secretary of State so
just to remind us all of the five tests
for adjusting the lockdown here we can
see that they relate to a capacity and
to mortality to deaths and also that we
are actually controlling the epidemic
itself and the transmission
the epidemic so looking at the first
graph here please the next slide we can
see again that this is about transport
it's a regular slide it shows that
overall transport uses down a good bit
by 50% but less so for Motor Vehicles
and that has been slowly increasing over
recent weeks and this is up to the
fourth of May and it's for the UK could
I have the next slide please
the important message and all that of
course is that we must still respect the
track that this virus does transmit and
to stay at home and not to interact too
much because people are still very
vulnerable to getting this virus now we
can see here the daily tests and these
have increased over time and this is up
to the 6th of May and but I will move on
really to the next slide which is of
interest which is the new cases and here
we have more new cases and and and this
may be a matter of concern but of course
it's also a matter of testing more so
they we are doing more testing and
therefore we will find more cases and
this is what we want to do we want to
find the positive cases so that we can
break transmission so on to the next one
please and this is about people in
hospital I know of great interest to you
listening and the news here is generally
very good you can see where London had
its early epidemic and it has declined
the cases in hospital have declined as
more slowly perhaps of other regions and
we see here where the Northwest has now
is has more cases inland in hospital
than London but overall we have about
13,000 cases which is a decrease and
it's good news and then if we can just
look at the most critically ill patients
and this is about critical care beds use
throughout the UK and this is again good
news it's for the four countries of the
UK and we can see here where we actually
have less than a third of critical care
beds being occupied by people with the
corona virus so good news there it is
declining and then we look at the
recorded deaths less good news here in
terms
these are very tragic it is very very
sad but the trend is is good because it
is slowly coming down and this is a
seven-day rolling average for the UK and
as have been said we have 649 yesterday
and that was a decline a slow decline
and then finally two slides about the
international death so the first one is
just the crude numbers and this of
course depends on the size of the
countries so we have you know over
67,000 deaths in the United States but
of course a big country and we can see
the UK and the European countries there
further down but if we look at the last
slide which is about the rates per
million population then we have taken
account of the size of the country and
we can see a different pattern where the
UK and European countries or are more
closely together and this I want to say
that this really is presented just to
show you different ways of looking at
that there are many different ways of
looking at death it is far too early to
say how this will eventually result for
how countries have fared in this
epidemic we need to give this some time
most of those who are used to looking at
these things would say probably a year
but it we thought you would be
interested to see so thank you Secretary
of State thank you very much
Yvonne and before we turn to questions
from the regional press we have two from
members of the public and the first one
is from Edward in Harrogate given that
excess in critical care beds across the
NHS and Nightingale hospitals my
question is why has the UK suffered a
greater number of deaths when compared
to countries such as Italy who had their
health care systems completely overrun
by curve in 19 well thank you Edward for
that question why has the UK suffered a
higher number of deaths compared to
Italy for example whose health care
system was overrun by covert 19 well I
think as the Prime Minister has said on
a number of occasions now it is
difficult to make international
comparisons with certainty today there
will be a time
for that and we have already established
the way in which we will measure that in
due course which is a measure of excess
deaths but that is a hard calculation to
do with accuracy today
of course we want to learn whatever
lessons we can do what we're still
responding to the virus but I think the
time for accurate international
comparisons will come in the future it
is more positive of course that when we
saw those very disturbing scenes earlier
in the year in Italy of their very good
health service being overwhelmed and
were concerned about the potential
impact upon the NHS that we haven't seen
those scenes in the UK we have had
sufficient ICU capacity we have had
sufficient ventilator capacity and of
course we've been able to build capacity
for example with the Nightingale
hospitals some of which have not been
used at all so far during the course of
the virus if Yvonne you want to add more
about the the international perspective
Thank You Secretary of State so credit
to the NHS for having not been
overwhelmed but in international
comparisons as I have mentioned
countries at word measure in very
different ways they measured this virus
number of deaths in different ways and
that is absolutely fine so long as that
is consistent in each country
it makes international comparisons very
difficult though because we are not
comparing like with like and it's worth
continuing to stress this because over
time probably the right measures have
been outlined by a number of our experts
including our chief medical officer
which would be excess mortality excess
deaths overall in a period of time and
then we will know truly how we have been
impacted but also this is a comparable
measure internationally so we would then
be able to understand how we have been
impacted internationally as well thank
you very much well our second question
is from Emma from Swansea and Emma's
question is religion is a huge part of
life for many in the UK seeing sport
prioritized
in discussions over other parts of life
has been hard to see
all the government protect the rights of
religious communities to practice their
faith in community as the lockdown is
eased well that's a very important
question
obviously it in any part of our lives
the government has been driven by a
desire to protect life and has taken
expert medical and scientific opinion
but we're very aware that this has been
a difficult period for different faith
groups you've seen for example the
Jewish community having to hold their
Saders Passover by zoom and without
having their friends and family around
them you then saw the same at Easter
where churches who are not able to come
together and the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Cardinal Nichols and
others held their sermons and and
services over the Internet as in
churches across the country and then at
the moment through Ramadan friends and
family are not able to come together to
break fast in the way that they
traditionally would and we know this is
very tough and none of us would want
these restrictions to continue a day
longer than they need to but it is right
that we stick to the advice the medical
advice at this time however much it goes
against our traditions and our religious
beliefs in order to protect others as
well as ourselves we are in conversation
with faith leaders across the country to
consider how when the time is right they
will be able to recommend services and
churches and mosques and synagogues
across the country but that moment it is
not now we're also been working with
them on how we can ensure that funerals
and other important events in people's
lives are conducted in an appropriate
way and my department has issued
guidance to enable people to hold
funerals in public spaces for example
like crematoriums with closed members of
their family around them because none of
us want to see scenes which we did see
unfortunately and a small number of
occasions early on in the virus of
funerals being conducted with few if
anyone present that wasn't right we've
issued guidance now so that shouldn't
happen again and we're working with
faithfully
to see how we're appropriate those
funerals could be conducted in churches
or other settings like that as well I
don't if Yvonne or Nicky you want to add
anything to that from as you said it's
important that we work with our
communities we also know that we've seen
a difference in how different
communities have had favored 19
infections as well as there's a lot that
we can do to understand how our
communities are responding and making
sure that communities have what they
need during the coming weeks and months
and could I just cite my thanks to the
various religious leaders that have
worked with public health England and
with the NHS to handle very sensitive
issues in a very helpful proactive way
understanding how very difficult this is
for the communities in terms of handling
the host in terms of group gatherings
and then sadly in terms of funerals and
respectful handling of bodies and we
have worked very constructively and for
that I am very grateful absolutely thank
you well thank you Emma for that
question and our first question from
members of the press comes from Patrick
Burns
from BBC West Midlands good afternoon
Patrick good afternoon Secretary of
State now I'm sure you don't need me to
remind you that at the beginning of all
this the Prime Minister pledged to local
authority leaders that they would have a
key role the lead role in bringing their
local communities and vulnerable people
through all this resources will follow
he said well six weeks on it's beginning
to look as though even the extra help
that you've been talking about just now
may not actually be enough if you think
of birmingham city council alone the
extra costs they've incurred already as
a result of this heading north of 260
million pounds and Counting and their
leader ian ward says that really crucial
services like adults social care and
children's services may be compromised
in the near future if as he puts it the
government doesn't match its words
with action well thank you well let me
be very clear to local council leaders
across the country including in the West
Midlands we will stand behind them
ensure that they have the resources that
they need to carry out the absolutely
critical thought functions that they're
playing in our national response to
coronavirus that was the promise that I
made to local council leaders as did the
prime minister early in the life of the
emergency we've already provided 3.2
billion pounds of additional resources
to councils in just the last two months
we've provide almost four billion pounds
of cash flow to councils precisely so
that they shouldn't have to face the
difficult choices that you've just
described between responding to the
virus in their own communities and
continuing to do very important public
service functions like refuse collection
for example looking after vulnerable
children in their communities in the
West Midlands local councils will
receive 347 million pounds to deal with
the pressures of coronavirus and that
comes on top of a very generous
settlement at the beginning of the
financial year which also increased
their course spending power by over 300
million pounds
if further resources are required to
meet the co vid related costs that we've
asked councils to bear then obviously
we'll take that into consideration in
the future and I've been working very
closely with local council leaders and
the mayor in the West Midlands and East
Street who's been doing a fantastic job
that leading the community forward
through a very difficult time as
anything further you'd like to ask
Patrick or move on to the next question
I just like to really sort of suggest
that the key issue here secretary of
state is making sure that the extra
support gets through to all the
authorities who need it if you take
structure as an example they say the
money that they've received doesn't yet
cover all the extra costs that they have
incurred and within that area if you
talk to Shrewsbury Town Council they've
been saying on BBC radio structure but
not one of them Nuth of the money is
actually filtering down to the lower
tier authorities like
who as they point out are actually
closest to the very communities who most
need the help well there's two there's
two points there firstly in terms of
ensuring that councils get the resources
they need we're absolutely committed to
doing that councils are receiving more
money so far than they have reported to
us as they as needing to meet the Cova
drah lated costs that they're bearing
there are also like other organizations
across the country seeing significant
reductions in their income because we're
not parking in their car parks and using
their leisure centres and so on and
that's a particular challenge that we're
also focused on but it's a separate
issue in the latest 1.6 billion pounds
that we provided to councils we made
sure that a significant amount of it did
flow to lower tier councils like
district councils for example and so
your average district council in England
will now receive if they haven't done so
already in the coming days a million
pounds or more of additional grant to
help them with kovat related expenditure
and also to stabilize their finances and
we've asked big parish councils like the
ones you've referred to in Shropshire
like Shrewsbury or bridgnorth or Ludlow
to speak with their principal councils
who will be receiving that million
pounds or more of funding and ensure
that it flows down to them if they're
also under financial pressure at the
moment and I hope that that will help
obviously my department and I are here
to - to speak with those councils and
ensure they get through this with us
together Thank You Patrick
I'll come to the second question now
which is from James Vincent from BBC
Yorkshire
good afternoon James afternoon thank you
very much I'm on BBC Look North tonight
we've gone out speaking to Sarah who's a
six-year-old from Tadcaster who needs a
kidney transplant her operation was
cancelled when the coronavirus crisis
hit what works the government and the
NHS doing to make sure that those people
they need vital care vital operations
away from coronavirus are going to get
that they get that as soon as possible
and what's the NHS and the government
doing to make sure that any backlog is
worked through in the in the best
possible way Thank You Jana and that's a
very important question which I'm sure
is on the mind of many people across
country can I perhaps come to Nikki in
the first sensitivity thank you for your
question and it's something that we're
thinking about very actively as you can
imagine I think it was right that over
the last few weeks and months the NHS
made a concerted effort to focus on
services that were either urgent for for
an individual or were related to the
coffered response and we absolutely had
to do that so we had to step away from
other procedures and routine reviews
that we might have otherwise done but
now and as my as a simon stevens wrote
last week we've asked the whole system
to start to think about how to get back
to what we call normal services and
there will be some things that we want
to keep so during the pandemic actually
services have have revolutionized the
way that they've worked whether that's
by using digital technology or
developing new ways of caring for
patients but in the case of the child
that you mentioned that that that child
will be prioritized and that operation
will be scheduled so that we can get
people back on track and that the really
important things happen as soon as
possible very good thank you do you have
a follow up question
Jason follow up on capsule finances our
councils in Yorkshire is saying that
there's a a 200 million pound gap
between what you're providing and what
they think they'll be spending on the
coronavirus crisis on Monday you told
MPs that some of those calculations from
councils were highly speculative and you
suggesting that they're perhaps getting
there some as well no not at all we've
provided as I've said 3.2 billion pounds
to councils are already plus 4 billion
pounds of cash flow so it's a lot of
money to be provided if you can just a
two month period two councils and we
think that is sufficient to meet the
immediate demands of the crisis however
as we understand better the length at
which lockdown measures may have to be
in place and the economic disruption
that flows as a result of the crisis
which is difficult to judge today we
will work with councils to ensure that
they have the funding that is required
so they can navigate their way through
this difficult period so my message to
councils is continue to do the important
work that you're doing whether that's on
adult social care getting
sleepers off the street supporting the
vulnerable getting those business grants
out to the community and we'll make sure
that you have the funding that's
required and we'll work with you to
better understand in the weeks and
months ahead the true impact upon your
finances of the disruption economically
that we're suffering and of their
response to coronavirus it's too early
to tell in some cases what those costs
will be but we will learn in the weeks
and months to come and we'll work very
closely with councils including
throughout Yorkshire thank you the next
question is from Tom Sheldrick who is
from ITV Tyne Tees Tom thank you good
afternoon last week our analysis
revealed that the northeast has had a
higher number of confirmed coronavirus
cases per head than any other parts of
England and the gap is continuing to
widen the virus is affecting some of the
most deprived areas in our region
particularly badly the regional chair of
the British Medical Association dr.
George
Ray has called for the government to act
on health inequalities which he
describes as a point of national shame
so what are you doing now to try to
reduce the number of people in the
Northeast being infect it with
coronavirus and going forward how will
you address long term issues which mean
that people in our region are less
likely to be in good health and a
greater risk from viruses like this
thank you Tom well I'll ask
Yvonne to speak in a moment it to the
the main part of your question but on
the broader issue of emerging data
suggesting the socio-economic impact
upon deaths with the virus
obviously that's extremely concerning to
us we want to understand all of the
contributing factors that make people
more vulnerable to the virus including
those and including for example some of
the ethnic groups like the Bahm
communities and their exposure to the
virus we're working with public health
England and on some of those issues like
for example the beim issue the chief
medical officers commissioned specific
research so we can better understand
that issue
and respond to it in due course but I've
honored and if you want to say more in
particular about the northeast and its
position
such a Tavares Thank You Secretary of
State Sir Tom there are over 8,000
confirmed positive cases of of corona
virus in the northeast at the moment and
as you say some areas of great need
which of course we would have been
involved with both from our National
through to local services in the public
health system before this epidemic what
we really need to know first is to
understand what additional or excess
impact this virus has had on those
communities and how distributed that
might be so as well as doing work on
generally on disadvantage in particular
groups in the population we would like
to look at the geographies that have
been most impacted by that and that work
is underway and and we will be able to
describe that as we go forward over the
coming weeks and months but we also I
would want to reassure you that you know
the business of as usual work needs to
continue in working locally with to
promote the health the good health of
people and to ensure that we are
protecting their health from issues
other than kovat because one of the
great dangers here is that people forget
that actually there are other harms in
the population some of which may be
greater than the virus itself so our
local teams working with local councils
and particularly local public health
departments directors of Public Health
are very active we're in touch every
week and sometimes several times a week
to understand the dynamics of what is
going on and to make sure that the good
business as usual as far as it can
continue continue and just one concern
is of course the first services of how
to stop for instance immunization or as
a smoking cessation that we actually
move as soon as we can when it's safe to
reestablish the preventive services as
well thank you Tom do you have a
couldn't follow up to that question or
were you content yes please state are
you considering lifting lockdown
restrictions later in regions like the
Northeast where the number of
coronavirus cases continues to grow
while it's perhaps stabilizing elsewhere
well the Prime Minister will set out on
Sunday our approach to the next phase of
the virus so I don't think that I can
helpfully you know presage that those
remarks our strong preference though is
that the whole country moves as one but
if as we build up our infrastructure for
testing and tracking and tracing in time
its required for us to make
interventions in smaller sort of micro
communities where you're seeing the
virus take hold again then that will be
something that we consider as other
countries around the world have done
when they've implemented effective track
and trace systems but that's quite
different to making major changes to
lockdown measures in one part of the
country versus another and our strong
preference as it was at the beginning of
the lockdown measures for the whole
country to move as one I'll go now to
the next question which is from Zena
Hawley from the darby telegraph Zena
thank you mr. chen eric i wanted to say
that Darby's a great city with a strong
industrial base but the announcement of
8,000 potential job losses at Rolls
Royce could have extreme consequences
obviously for the company but also for
the supply chain of the companies that
obviously supply it what can the
government do to help Rolls Royce a
company that's always been there for
Britain through times of extreme
hardship etc and also could ask more
widely what role does the government
expect cities like Darby to play as we
emerge from the current crisis well
thank you very much and I share your
concern for the news of potential job
losses at Rolls Royce I know how
important Rolls Royces to Darby to the
Midlands and to the whole country it's
one of our most important advanced
manufacturing business you know one with
a very rich history and I'm certain a
business that will have a great future
as well it's renowned all over the world
aviation is an important sector to the
economy but it is a sector facing almost
unprecedented
issues as a result of coronavirus we
want to support the aviation sector in
any way that we can do the chancellor
has already announced an unprecedented
set of measures to support businesses
large and small I know that rolls-royce
is a business that has already taken
advantage for example of the job
retention scheme furloughing some of its
employees from April we're going to work
closely with the sector and we've said
before that we're willing to consider
situations where we would support
individual firms but obviously only when
they've worked through the existing
government schemes and other ways in
which they might be able to raise
finance commercially or through existing
shareholders if there's more we can do
for rolls-royce we want to do so and I
know that the business secretary and the
Chancellor are already in contact with
rolls-royce and will do so again in the
future
as regards Derby more generally well
it's one of our great cities city I know
well representing Nottingham sure
constituency nearby I'm certain it has a
strong future I will be working closely
with local leaders to ensure that their
plans for rebuilding and recovering the
local economy
work in step with those that we're
producing nationally and the voice of
the business community in Derby is heard
in the decisions that we're making here
in Whitehall and that's the same for
cities for local government leaders and
for mayor's across the country thank you
very much it was refer the question
you'd like to add or you to my heart as
the education correspondent at the Derby
Telegraph schools and their plans for
reopening I've had discussions with
local unions I've had discussions with
local experts in the education field and
there is a strong feeling that it's
going to be very very difficult to
achieve very easily and I'm wondering
whether or not there is going to be any
move towards having PPE in schools at
all so far teachers have been going into
school they've been there with four key
workers children they've carried on and
I know there's been quite a bit of
illness among teach
but I mean what can we do to protect our
teachers and actually give confidence to
parents staff and pupils that could be
going back to school anytime thank you
well I know that there will be concerned
from teachers as a different parents and
the education sector been working
closely with the trade unions and other
representatives from education to plan a
phase to reopen in schools when the time
is right we have taken scientific advice
with respect to the level of PPE that
might be required in schools and I'll
let if on speak to that perhaps in a
moment to who's better place than Iowa
but as I understand it the the advices
that staff in non-residential education
settings don't require PPE but we will
obviously keep that under close review
and we've also published guidance on
social distancing within schools which
is already being applied in the schools
that are open obviously only with a
small percentage of students currently
in them but which will inform the plans
that are emerging for the reopening of
schools when the time's right and if
we've on there's anything you'd like to
add Cina yes
so I'm getting the confidence of parents
and teachers it will be critical
actually as to whether the children
would come back to school even if it was
agreed that they should and it's part of
what it can be done there is part of a
package it's very important that you're
probably thinking about PBE like face
masks now face masks there's been a lot
of debate about that they are helped
probably helpful to protect others from
yourself when you're not well
particularly if you're exerting droplets
mist neoprene a coughing and sneezing
and so on but they have to be worn
properly and people always forget that
face masks are not actually what is
going to contain the virus wholly it is
a whole package of issues like good
hygiene particularly hand hygiene how
you interact your hand with your face
and so on so and equally you know how
how the school environment is kept clean
disinfected how the children are spaced
and this will all take quite a lot of
organization so this is why no one is
rushing to do this
and surely and we have looked at what
other countries are doing on this so
that we're learning about how countries
have gained the confidence of parents
and teachers teachers are key workers
and if they're unwell they can have
testing and they should do that and
indeed should not work if they're unwell
so there is good guidance we in public
health England and others are working
with the Department for Education
intensely on this and with indeed the
trades unions and others in those
conversations so that we try to get this
right thank you
prova welcome to the next question now
which is from Keith Rossiter and Keith
is from Cornwall live and the Western
Morning News good afternoon Keith
afternoon sorry state well thanks for
the encouraging your viewers calm or
relies heavily on tourism and our
hoteliers publicans and resource fear
that they can lose the whole year if
they don't reopen by July that happens
what will the government do to support
them thank you well I think we all
understand that many businesses across
the country are suffering but those in
hospitality are particularly poorly
equipped to to cope with what's
happening at the moment and an economy
such as the Southwest which is so
heavily dependent on tourism will be
very significantly impacted the the
package of measures that the Chancellor
has already brought forward are helping
businesses in Cornwall and Excel West's
councils will receive over one and a
half billion pounds of business support
and there's a hundred and twenty six
thousand businesses within the southwest
who are eligible for those grants I know
that Cornwall Council is one of the best
in the country for getting those grants
out to the businesses who really need
them they've already paid out two
hundred and two two hundred and two
million pounds worth of grants to
seventeen thousand seven hundred eighty
nine firms which is one of the highest
in England and I pay tribute to the
officers
Calma council for doing that the Prime
Minister has said today that if further
interventions are required to support a
sector like tourism hospitality we will
obviously consider that and bring
forward appropriate measures when
they're needed we know that it's going
to be very difficult for them in the
months to come and we want to try to
guide their path through this period so
that they like the rest of the economy
can bounce back when we're able to
reopen in due course Keith I don't if
you have a second question Sir Patrick
valence earlier in the week suggested
that into that term some regions could
come out of lockdown sooner and we
sought from one of the slides earlier
that the Southwest has the lowest number
of cases if that if we were released
sooner what support with every four
Devon and Cornwall Police who are
already very only stretched to prevent a
large scale invasion of holidaymakers
well spent Evon to speak about the
regional disparities in the path of the
the virus and how we might respond to
that including through tracking a
tracing in terms of local councils and
the emergency services and ensuring that
they have the support that's required as
I said earlier we're providing
additional funding to forces and the
Home Secretary is speaking with national
police chiefs to ensure that they have
the right guidance and consistent
messaging that they can use to enforce
the lockdown rules where that's required
and as we've seen so far the vast
majority amounts the public have chosen
to do so and to adhere to the messaging
and most police forces have been able to
to support the lockdown measures through
consent which is the way we want to do
things in this country but in the
isolated number of cases where that's
not been possible obviously they've also
had tools at their disposal to
fine and to enforce the lockdown Evon so
Thank You Secretary of State so and keep
the there are over 14,000 confirmed
cases in Cornwall and the saying that
it's a big County so actually the
epidemic seems to have had somewhat less
impact in in that in the southwest and
we need to be absolutely sure that it
stays that way so we're watching it very
carefully and hopefully it will now if
and when restrictions ease on the way
people are living lives at the moment
and it would be very important that we
don't begin to see the reemergence of
transmission and while secretary state
has been describing is this major
program that we are actually trialing at
the moment through the use of an app in
the Isle of Wight but will be much
broader than that it will be really a
population-based program to ensure the
people who are unwell particularly with
the symptoms of this virus are isolated
pretty quickly and tested quickly and
that their contacts particular immediate
context the ones that matter are also
informed and can take action and that
will absolutely be key to gradually
releasing life back to a changed normal
and that program is being launched this
month and it's very important that we're
confident that that works well thank you
and thank you Keith your questions if I
may not go to the last question which is
from Chris Young and Chris is the local
democracy reporter based at The
Telegraph and Argus in Bradford
good afternoon last few weeks there's
been many student nurses paramedics
midwives called to the front line of the
NHS to help with the current pandemic
many of them in Bradford now due to
changes made a couple of years ago by
the government the current cohort
finally year student nurses having to
pay their fees without the support of
bursaries and effectively they're having
to
risk their lives and use Logan's to pay
to do that I mean do you think it's fair
that these student nurses who were
stepping up to help the NHS having to
get into debt and risk their lives and
then facing this mountain of debt
afterwards and would you support any
campaign by the Telegraph and august's
and other local news organizations to
have this scrapped their tuition fees
scrapped once this is all done well
thank you Chris and thank you for the
work that the telegraph on August does
in Bradford supporting the NHS including
those health care professionals who've
chosen to come back to work in the
service and who have done a fantastic
job already and many are still returning
to work in the NHS and in social care
we're very grateful for Nursing and
Midwifery students who have chosen to go
onto the frontline and help in our
hospitals and care homes at this time
those nurses and midwives who have opted
in will receive the salary and the
pension that is appropriate to their
level and I'm also told that the student
loan company have confirmed that student
loans will continue regardless of
whether the individual is learning or
whether as in this case they've chosen
to opt in and help us in the NHS but
we're all I think is massively grateful
for those people for everything that
they're doing on the frontline I don't
know if Nicky you wants anything more
about the returners and yes echo your
thanks festival we've seen an incredible
number of not just our students coming
to work it's a really challenging time
across all the professions but a huge
number of staff coming back so people
who've retired or who've left the NHS
thinking that they want to come back and
work with us and support our patients so
I'm incredibly grateful to them we hope
that some of those people who've
returned will want to stay with us as
well so we're looking now to create
different ways of working so that those
members of staff who've come back and
joined us can stay working with us and
that could be different different ways
so digitally remote
we are working with their local
practices in the case of primary care
but we really do thank them and we
really value the time that they've given
us at a it's a very challenging time
great thank you Chris is a follow up you
like to ask it seems like a long time
ago now but early March the government
announced a lot in the budget a lot of
support for Yorkshire and Bradford
devolution and a huge amount of funding
obviously a lot has changed since then a
lot of this funding was seen as vital to
help areas like Bradford regenerate with
all its change can it be any guarantee
that all these projects this funding
devolution is still going to be there or
are places like Bradford back to the
drawing board after this well thank you
that's that's a very important question
to end this afternoon's press conference
on the this government was elected on a
platform of leveling up and uniting the
whole country and we have absolutely no
intention of stalling those plans and in
fact unfortunately some of those places
that we were already focused on already
working with are exactly the sorts of
communities and economies that are
likely to be most hit by the economic
disruption that's going to come out of
coronavirus and so it is extremely
important that we'll return we are going
to leave that last question there at the
daily briefing because it's almost time
for the six o'clock news Georgia alla
goya is here now though the weather with
Helen Willits
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News